# Alternative-Fuels-Random-Forest
The use of alternative fuels is seen as one of the main levers for decarbonizing maritime transport and a lot of resources are devoted in fostering their adoption and development. In this project, I am interested in predicting if already existing vessels have the option to use alternative based on their ship specific design parameters. For the task, the random forests machine learning algorithm is used to classify if a ship uses alternative fuels or not. To deal with the class imbalances in the binary outcome variable a down-sampling strategy is applied and missing values in the predictors are imputed by the k-Nearest Neighbors algorithm. To find the random forest model with the best predictive power, I tune the hyperparameters by applying a simple grid search and evaluate the models' performance with a 5-fold cross validation. Since this process requires to train 50 random forests with a 1000 decision trees each, I parallelize the training process. Lastly, I evaluate the best performing random forest on the test set, visualize the results, and assess the importance of the individual predictors. The final random forest model is able to predict correctly the vessels using alternative fuels with roughly 90\% accuracy and looks promising for the classifying new unseen data. From a maritime perspective, the identified high importance of the length (LOA) is a surprising results, which could motivate a more thorough investigation of the ship designs of vessels already using alternative fuels.
